**Instructor Read Me File for Tableau Data Visualization Class -- Day
Two**

**STEP BY STEP through the two-day class:**

**\*\*The info below is repeated for Day Two, just so you can see what
needs to be done.**

**THERE ARE NO LABS FOR CHAPTERS 1, 2 and 12!!! All the rest are LOADED
with labs. The students will be able to hear a word (like distribution,
forecast, how much) and easily know which type of chart they should
create for the business! An excellent class so they no longer have to
guess!**

**A suggestion.... Chapter 13 is about Dashboards, Chapter 14 is about
Advanced Dashboards. Depending on time, you could do chapter 13 and
leave chapter 14 as optional or a workshop.**

**Day One - Try to complete Chapters 1-8, Day Two, Try to complete
Chapters 9-14.**

**Since Chapters 1 and 2 should be very quick, you should have no
trouble getting this schedule done. In longer chapters, you can skip
labs and make them optional.**

**Day Two====**

**If you left off on Day One with Chapter 8, then you will need to do a
lab chat, explaining what the students did. If you are starting Day Two
with Chapter 8, then please open Day One Instructor Read Me and go over
what you need for the students for Chapter 8.**

**Chapter 9 -- Changes Over Time**

This is a very logical and important chapter. 99% of what we all need,
are charts that work with time Please go over pages 149 and 150. Include
Voltaire's quote at the top. It is cool! This should take no more than
10 minutes

The students will use a variety of Data Sources for this chapter. But
the chapter is quick, to the point and they will enjoy it. There will
not be loads of questions either, because it is very clear.

Let the students loose to work on all the labs from pages 151 to 179.
You can allow them 60 minutes to finish "as many as possible" in that
time frame. (all the labs are cool and important, but you have a lot to
do on day two)

Here are some points regarding the labs that you should know about.

On page 151, the students will work with a simple line chart. The data
source will be "strikeoutsmlb.xlsx" (sheet 1). There are a lot of
baseball terms here and they used shortcut initials to describe them.
Let the students work on pages 151 through the top of page 154. This
will allow them to work with simple time lines and charts.

On pages 154-157, dual axis plots are explained. All the students should
be very familiar with them at this point. However there is a new
calculation that needs to be created on page 155. That calculation is as
follows:

Pitchers Per Team

Sum(\[\#pitch\]) / Sum(\[TMS\])

Page 158 introduces two great concepts together. Scatterplots and
watching them be connected. Have the students finish all the labs up to
page 161 if possible.

On page 162, the data source changes. It is working with the
"[CDWT\_ch9\_NYCRatSightings.xlsx](https://github.com/ONLC-Classes/XTBD10---Tableau-Data-Visualization/blob/master/Workbooks/Chapter%209/CDWT_ch9_NYCRatSightings.xlsx)"
data source. These are great timeline charts that clearly outline
sightings.

Page 166 starts working with a data source called
"CDWT\_ch9\_PresidentialTerms.xlsx". This is a great lab, but they
should copy the two calculated fields from the solution, instead of
typing them. They are called "Life Span" and "Time in Office". This is a
GREAT chart which looks amazing after being filtered and sorted. The
finished product is on page 169.

**OPTIONAL**

Page 172 has them create a parameter. They will be using a data source
here called "slopegraph". "CDWT\_ch9\_Slopegraph.xlsx". This is a cool
looking chart and with the parameter, also makes it very efficient.
There are also three calculated fields on pages 176 and 177 (Delta,
Better or Worse, and Magnitude" -- these can be copied from the solution
for the purpose of speed. Or students can open the solution to see the
entire chart completed. These three calculations are designed to show
change for various reasons, over time.

**Chapter 10 -- Chapter 11 -- Mapping and Advanced Mapping.**

Start on page 181 & 182, going over maps. Talk about how "smart" Tableau
is, by knowing exactly how to deal with Mapping.

It is suggested that you walk through this chapter with the students,
limiting the time to approximately 50 minutes. Show mainly, the
difference between symbol and filled maps and how to create custom
groups on the map. Show the filtering techniques and then show how to
change the group colors, if desired.

The Dual Axis map on page 198 is quick as well.

Once you use Chapter 10 as a jump off point, have the students turn to
page 203 and explain that there are many advanced concepts that can be
done with mapping. They will LOVE these labs but there is not loads of
time for you to complete them. Open the solution with the students and
go over the labs with it. Then, offer the students the option to go back
after class has ended and create Chapter 11, advanced mapping.

**Chapter 12 -- The Joy of Dashboards**

This is a conceptual chapter which talks about best practice, regarding
Dashboards. It is a pre-requisite for the Dashboard Chapters coming up.
Get through it in about 15 minutes if possible. Explain that the
students will work next with Dashboards.

**Chapter 13 -- Building Dashboards -- Chapter 14 -- Advanced
Dashboards**

Like Chapters 7 and 9, this chapter will be of utmost importance to the
students. Go over page 239 (including quote at top), and introduce
terminology on page 240-242.-THEN, move to page 277 and talk about what
is covered in this chapter 14. This should take a total of about 15
minutes.

The idea is that you will do both chapters back to back and either walk
through or leave them with the labs. The labs are great and some will
want to walk through Chapter 13 with you, but may wish not to do Chapter
14 labs. This is a decision which they can make

Starting on page 243, the students will build an extraordinary
dashboard. You should get them started by throwing together a quick
dashboard as a demo. It should be a demo designed only to explain what
the purpose of a dashboard is, and how many people confuse the term
dashboard with a Tableau Worksheet.

You can choose to walk through the dashboard creation in chapter 13 as
much or as little as you wish to. However, this chapter is very
important and introduces parameters as well as filters of dashboards.
So, it may be something you want to go through with them, taking a break
at some point, so they really "get it".

The data source is quite interesting. It focuses on Internet usage
globally. Look for a data source called
"CDWT\_Ch13\_WorldBank\_InternetUsage.xlsx".

Actions will be covered on Page 258. You can explain this before they do
the lab, or with them. Since you will be offering these chapters back to
back, you will not have a lab chat. Instead, you will have a workshop,
where they can finish as much as possible, until the end of class.

Chapter 14 goes into detail about Dashboard objects, google sheets and
even adding you tube videos to the dashboard, and some concepts that
will take the dashboards "over the edge". Fabulous concepts if they have
time.

  -- --
     
  -- --
